Hello and welcome to the Stellar Open Protocol Discussion. So for those of you watching at home, I just want to give a quick overview. The goal of these meetings is to talk about and plan for changes to upcoming versions of the Stellar protocol. We go over Core Advancement Proposal, or CAPs for short. These are open source specs that describe new features designed to evolve the protocol to meet ecosystem needs. All CAPs begin with a draft and they go
Through a rigorous process before they're actually implemented in Stellar core. And even then they don't actually hit the network until validators vote to upgrade to the new version of the protocol that implements them. So, crucially, not all drafts make it across the finish line right changes to the protocol. They require deliberation, diligence and meetings like this. They're just one part in the CAP life cycle. So today we have two CAPs to discuss, and again, these are both drafts- CAP 37 and CAP 38- both of which have the same goal, which is to introduce automated market makers- or AMMs for short, at the protocol level. So automated market makers are a simple way to provide liquidity necessary for asset exchange. You may have heard of things like uniswap. They've shown that automated market makers are effective at providing an easy to access liquidity at scale. They essentially allow for the creation of liquidity pools which are simple and non interactive and which can attract large amounts of capital and enable high volumes of trading. So the goal of both these proposals, CAP 37 and CAP 38,
Is to add automated market makers to Stellar in order to improve overall liquidity on the network. They differ slightly, but that they have the same goal. So two things before we start. One: this is a technical discussion, very technical, so if you want to follow along, I suggest that you read the CAPs and the recent developer mailing list threads about them, both of which are linked to in the event description. Two: AMMs are a big topic and the goal today is not to get to the end of the discussion about them. Rather, we're just beginning the discussion. So we'll start to bring key questions about these proposals to light so that the discussion and debate can continue. On the Stellar developers google group just getting started. That group is open participation, which means that if you have an opinion or some great insight about AMMs to share, you too can join in. Just follow the link in the event description. All right, without further ado, let us start to talk about amn. So again, we have these two proposals, but they have a lot of questions in common and then they also have some differences, and we're sort of going
To get into both today. And the first sort of topic that we wanted to talk about was a question about reserve requirement and how it works in each of these CAPs. So CAP 37 has the pool creator, the person who creates the liquidity pool, paid for the pool ledger entry, and CAP 38 does not increase the reserve requirement. So I guess the first question is: which model is better? Is there any concern about either model? So reserve requirements: well, this isn't very deep, but it's easier to reduce reserve requirements than increase them. So you know, if there's doubt, I guess it'd be more conservative to have the reserve requirement initially. Maybe we can go over the motivation for not having reserve requirements because most ledger entries do.
Yeah, I can sound just kind of weird, anyway. So in CAP 38, that version of the proposal does not have the reserve requirement and the main motivation is basically, it's not remotely obvious who should own this thing in the first place. Like why should any given account be responsible for paying this, which is, you know, it can't be used by a single person in the first place, intrinsically a multi party thing, and being the person who created it isn't necessarily a meaningful concept. But more importantly, it's not that there's no reserve requirement at all because the pool can't exist if there isn't at least one trust line for the pool share. I should say so. Basically, it's kind of like you get it like you know, when you're the first person to create the pool, you get it like half off. You basically get two entries for the price of one. But then you know, if there were a
Thousand people using the pool, it would actually be like a thousand people paying a reserve for one single entry. Or if there were, you know, ten thousand people would be even more like that. So that's kind of the way that I see this motivation. All right, so there's no way to abuse this, because you can't just create an infinite number of these. You'll need infinite number of trust lines as well. So in other words, basically the trust line it sort of serves as the reserve requirement, rather than creating a new reserve requirement specific to a liquidity pool. Right, that's a pretty good explanation of it. Yeah, I mean, I think, like I mean that's a reasonable explanation. Yeah, so it'd be a bummer if we changed our minds, but yeah, and later wanted to like increase it, but that does seem reasonable.
I mean, if that's the case, maybe we're done talking about reserve requirements, like does anyone have anything else to say about them? Yeah, we sort of started with the easiest topic just to warm up. So if that one's that easy and we can move on, I guess, like maybe. So the reason I added that question in the first place was because it was more like thinking for, like they are potentially very large. I mean the, pool, basically to describe it, you need to basically describe you know what, which assets are part of that pool. Right now we're only discussing concern products as part of this, but you can imagine having a lot more complicated type of pools, so maybe the
Amount of data that is tied to this one pool could be much larger than what we are talking about now. For example, I think in the, I think compound type of world. they have like multi assets, like more than two assets actually in your pool, and I think in if you have like kings or v3 type of stuff. Yeah, now you have like those bitmaps that are in there as well. I mean like the cost of that becomes much larger. So I don't know, you know, is it? Does that count really just as a single ledger entry, or do we need to do something better? If we, if right now we make it basically implicitly attached to a truss line. We're kind of stuck with that model forever as opposed to maybe if it had, if it was separate- we could imagine, okay, if we change our mind- and it has to be more expensive because, you know, those things are gigantic- we can, you know we have that as a
Separate thing, but maybe that a fun because, yeah, the creator, like we can maybe give the first trust line free or something I mean kind of equivalent, right, like as part of this. I mean the thing is like there shouldn't be like a gazillion of these things, right. So if it turns out that, you know, I mean I can imagine, going forward that it turns out that there's any number of things like it might turn out that we really only want a few hundred of these liquidity pools in the network and so we would turn it into like an auction to see like which asset pairs are, like you know, worthy of having the automated market maker or you know, or it's just kind of. The thing is, even if it costs like 100 lumens to create one of these things, it just wouldn't be that big a deal because that if it's actually a useful liquidity pool, that cost would be amortized over a large number of users, so I guess it doesn't seem like it really matters, because I guess we could also say,
Because I guess we could also say later on, like hey, price just went up, but will grandfather in the existing liquidity pools or something. So what happens to the pool when the last trust line disappears? I think in both proposals it's supposed to be automatically removed. I'm just wondering if there's some kind of spammy edge case where people create and destroy trust lines quickly to get some kind of ephemeral pull advantage. I mean, I guess it could, but like the nature of the pool, it's not really useful if it's not sitting around, right so and you can't be a participant in the pool if your trust line doesn't exist because you wouldn't be able to hold the shares, So I it's hard to see how you could get value from that. I do think that, like nikola has a good point about the multi asset pools. You know like balancer type pools,
And I think in that kind of a setting, we could always say, you know, like, okay, well, we're gonna charge fees for charge reserves for those types of pools, but not for these types. You know, I think there's a lot of flexibility. You know we already have a mechanism by which we can do this, which is sponsorship, so we wouldn't have to invent anything new. It's just a matter of like. Do we think that that's even necessary at this point? For me, the answer's like, probably no. I mean like if we? To me, yeah, I agree that right now we don't need it. It's more like: are we, is it possible to add it later if we have to, if we don't, if we're not careful? Basically because in the capital eight world, I guess we would have to force people to wrap their trust land creation with some sort of like sponsorship
Thing, or maybe responsible by default, I don't know. Yeah, maybe that maybe that's fine. It just changes the cost of creating a trustline, so maybe that's okay. I mean, what would the change look like? In general, I'm not a fan of complicating today's thing because of potentially tomorrow, but you want to like, add, like one field to the operation. That's like the extra fee for creating the trust line or something. I think we should just be on type. So I think it wouldn't actually change the contract. So it's actually fine. Yeah, like we ever have a new type of pools that are like those gigantic things and we believe that they- you know there should be no free riding on this- then we can always add like this, like those would be sponsored. Basically, instead of right now they would like the. I mean right now you have the field that allows them to be sponsored, except we don't use it.
All, right, I think we can move on, okay. So the next question is about DEX integration, which I think is a bigger question. So both proposals give access to liquidity from both pools and the DEX, but they vary in their approach. John. Will you just walk us through the difference between CAP 37 and CAP 38 in their approaches to DEX integration? Sure, thanks. So basically, both of them put the access to trading with liquidity pools or automated market makers inside of path payment and that's the only access point to this functionality. There is no like trade only with the order broker, trade only with the AMM. It's just one operation which is more like trade. Now the difference in how these work is that in CAP 37 OrbitLens proposal, like, the idea is that you're going to
Try to always get the best price. So you might imagine a situation where, like the you know you have, let's say you have an order and the price is at like a hundred dollars or something for whatever you're trying to buy, and like the marginal price on the amn is at 95 right now, but the AMM has like really small reserves, So you might say like, okay, well, first I'm gonna trade against the AMM until the price hits a hundred dollars, then I'll go and cross the orderbook and take that first order. And then you know, now I'm going to now, the next price is at 105, and so I'm going to trade against the am until it goes to 105, etc. And you do both, stepping back and forth between the two, depending on which one gives you the best margin price. In CAP 38, to kind of avoid that complexity, the approach is basically: just what if I took the entire trade, against the AMM? Or what if I took the entire trade against the orderbook and just give you whichever of those two produces
The best price? So you would never do like some amn and some orderbook. It would either be all orderbook: oil a- m- sorry, best price or best volume. So even if the volume is tiny, you would take it. So I'm saying best price in the context of like. Imagine that I'm trying to trade a specified amount like I wanna. I wanna, you know, buy three thousand widgets or something. I'm gonna do whatever it takes to get the best price for those three thousand widgets. If I can't get 3 000 widgets on one of the two options, then that's not an option. Wait, sorry, so it's they're all or nothing now. Oh, I see, yeah, because that's working. That's right okay, But so in the CAP 37 example, where it? always tries to get the best price and may execute part of it on it via the AMM and part of it via the orderbook? What does it do? It splits the amount that you want into a bunch of different path payments,
I guess. I mean it's kind of hard to explain what it does at like an implementation level, but it it's all it's like still going to come through as a single operation and just inside the implementation it's going to know to you know kind of do this incremental approach, so it's completely invisible to the user, right. And so in both proposals can you have arbitrage opportunities between the orderbook and the AMM. So in the cap37 proposal there are no arbitrage opportunities between the two because they get resolved automatically as you trade. In the cap38 proposal there can be. But the reality is that with like spreads as wide as they are on the orderbook today, if there were ever a situation where there was an arbitrage opportunity between the AMM and the orderbook, there would also be an arbitrage opportunity between the AMM and any external orderbook for the same product.
Probably I mean like I can't, give you 100 guarantee on that. But you know, I think, it's pretty common to have like spreads on the orderbook today, greater than half percent. So I would think that you know if you're looking at any more liquid place in the world. That would probably get you into an arbitrage universe there. First, with the cap37 implementation, would it be possible to build an attack where you constantly switch between the orderbook and the pool, like a with a single path name? Like is that a concern? What kind of it? Like what would this attack do? Exactly? Right, it would take the minimum amount from the pool and it decides that the orderbook has the next best price and then after that it would switch back to the pool and just keep going back and forth, while in CAP 38 you would just choose one or the other right. Do you see what I'm saying?
So this is I mean like there can only in. the world where there's exactly one orderbook and exactly one AMM, there can only be as many switches as there are offers in the worst case. So like if there's 10 000 offers, there could be ten thousand switches, but there couldn't be twenty thousand. That would be impossible. Does that make sense? Do I need to convince you of that? I could, no, I think that makes sense. Okay, yeah, the worst case behavior is to DEX not, you know, that's always the answer. One comment I have is that whatever we implement in core, we have to be able to model it outside of core. Like horizon has to be able to calculate the same thing to give you the best path payment, and presumably third parties would also want to do that. So we should bear that in mind. Like it can't be completely opaque.
What do people kind of feel about? What's the good approach here? I think one important question here is: like CAP 37 seems to suggest that the DEX is a valuable thing and should be maintained and the markets will be maintained alongside. Because if the, if everything just migrates to the automatic market, makers then have this like complexity of interleaving requests, of no leaving offers seems to be like doesn't make sense, right. So the question is like: do we think that the ecosystem is going to migrate like are we? Are there use cases that automatic market makers are not
Providing a good solution for as much as the DEX is? I think there are, but it'll probably be per asset pair anywhere, like if I had to predict, I would say that for you know, if I want to like you know, do an ipo of my company on Stellar. I'm gonna just basically like put the orderbook there. I mean it'll be offer my shares for sale, like on the orderbook or something right. And if I'm trying to do like forex exchanges or whatever, then probably the AMM is going to be best. So it seems unfortunate that kind of like: the more intermingling of these abstractions, the harder it's going to be to, like you know, improve each individual one in the future. The more complexity there's going to be and it's not clear what the payoff is going to be. The market will do better with impermanent loss, right? So when there's knowledge outside of the blockchain, the market will take advantage of it much more effectively than the AMM. Yep, seems like an argument to have it.
You know I'm not saying get rid of the. existing DEX. I'm just saying, you know, have both, but don't have them terribly intermingled like they sort of. Ideally, improvements to the mm don't need to, like you know, change the logic of the orderbook, as you know, as much as possible, and vice versa. So then it would just be a user choice more than anything, whether to use the AMM or use the DEX- a market maker choice. The user would just get the best price available for a path payment right, but someone who's trying to make a market could either use our AMM, or if it's not good, then they could use the DEX. Comer, I would kind of ask you like, can you think of anything where people would want to use, like would have a good justification for using both on the same product? Because I agree with David? Like I can think of lots of cases where the AMM will be better than the DEX, or lots of cases where I say the DEX, I should say the orderbook.
Lots of cases where the orderbook would be better than the AMMs, but I can't think of a case where people would be obviously indifferent between the two. Well, I think what could happen is that you know that AMMs are used to like bootstrap a market, but that then, when the market is like you know, a really big deal, then some big market maker will come along and they would rather have the control of setting explicit limit orders, because they can set, have a lot of depth and they can kind of adjust to x, you know, external factors that affect the price, and so they would prefer that and so I could see the AMM is way to bootstrap a market and then like a full on market maker using the orderbook once it makes sense for them to do that, because there's enough volume that is profitable for them to make the market in the traditional way. But cap38 would satisfy that without the extra complexity. So at the moment it doesn't seem like
Anyone's arguing that the extra complexity of cop 37 is worth, has a benefit that makes it worth while really, is that true? Is there anyone who thinks cap37 and the super interleaved process is substantially better? But I think the argument for that behavior is actually what orbit wrote, I think this morning on the dave mailing list, which is trying to limit, like, the number of times you have, like this, arbitrage opportunities between emm and the existing orderbook. The thing is that I don't know if you have any data really to kind of say that this is going to be
A big problem inside, like this is like inside a specific, like, even on the DEX overall. Like you have pairs that I mean yeah, are assets that represent the same thing, right, they're just issued by different people and that doesn't solve. I mean, CAP 37 doesn't solve that. So that's why I'm kind of a in the camp of like starting with this simple thing, first see how that goes and then adjust, like based on that. Because, yeah, this interleaving- so far on, you know the type of things I'm saying- it's actually very hard to even come up with like environments or things that you want to happen. If we want to change the, what the mm is doing, like if it's something more complicated than constant product, I'm not even sure
We can, yeah, explain what we exp, what we expect to happen, like we want the best price, but when you have like grounding and all those issues that come in play, it actually becomes really complicated to try to reason about this. So I would delay that decision as much as possible. That's my opinion and there's a chance that you know we'll want a third thing. That's neither an AMM nor the existing DEX, and so you know it's nice the idea that, okay, we can just have multiple approaches to this coexisting and they don't have to be tightly integrated. That leaves us more flexibility in the future. Great. Anything else about DEX integration, or should we move on to the next topic? is pool parameter updates.
I think sid was working on something related to this. Is that true? Yeah, I wrote something on the that mailing list yesterday. I can talk about that if you like. Yeah, will you talk us through it? Yeah, so it. It's. What I propose is an extension on what orbit? Pros, where you include the fee in the ledger header. So, instead of just having one fee, you have, you know, all the fees you may want to use. For example, if you had a couple different constant product pools with different fees, you have all them, the ledger header and, depending on which pool you're interacting on, you would pull the fee from there. This will allow you to upgrade the fees without a protocol update. The issue here, though, is that you know, the more pools we add, more parameters we add wherever we. If we store this in the ledger head, it'll get polluted wherever we decide to store it somewhere else.
Like it may become an issue. So that was what I proposed. I think Niko had a different proposal related to storing the parameters in the ledger pull key, I believe, and maybe you can talk about that right. So I guess, like, what I described was not necessarily where to start. I mean like there's like there are actually different concepts here, because, let's see, it is the other question after. So just maybe one thing that will help me, can we just talk about what parameters there might be that we would need to store other than right? So like the type of things that I think people were talking about. So, for the obvious one is: we have a proof, a puffy right.
That's the one that is kind of the really the only parameter and a constant product pool. We have other parameters also, like minimum amounts that we want people to be able to deposit like basically a unit. You can think of it as a unit of deposit or withdrawal that helps with guaranteeing certain levels of liquidity. Basically, when you do all those operations, what there's, I think some of those when you have like the more than two assets type. Of course, those have actually formulas that are getting even more complicated because now you have like different weights for those assets. I think those are like the ones that are known right now, right, I think for like
Right now, right, I think for like unison b3 type of pool. You have like a step size also. I mean yeah, it's up to future. So- and there are a few other things that are like, for example, curve has this amplification factor and that would be something else that would have to be stored if we were to use that. Is there an issue with storing all of this in the leisure header. I'm assuming, like you want to get two actually, so the one, actually, I guess, like when I wrote this question, what I was thinking at the time, was more: like, there's this question of if you store the parameter as a global as opposed to be something that is attached to the pull itself, well, that means is that, if you want to ch, if you change the value of that parameter, so if you change the c, for
Example, you're actually changing the fee for every pool in existence, every instance. Right, and actually have a hard time to kind of understand how that model works in a world where you have other parameters other than the key, like for the fee. Maybe it works for other parameters, I think it changes the dynamics of the pool so much that you're actually you're really talking about a very different pool at that point and it may not actually be something desirable. This first version is: we are establishing the model that we want going forward and you know, constant product is very special and I don't want to be stuck with that, you know, with whatever choice comes out of that. So you're really focused here on the update. Like updating the
What? Should it be possible to update the parameters on an existing pool? It's kind of the main crux here. I think it's yeah, it derives from this choice, right, that is, if it's a global, that means when you update it, you change everywhere, right? My stance on this is that, like, you shouldn't be able to retroactively update things. You know, if you wanted to switch to a different pool, create the new pool, move your money into there and let people vote with their feet or with their money, however you want to say it. My stance on this is more a ux thing than anything else. You know what I really don't like seeing looking on my bank statement and being like: oh, I used to get 1 5 interest, now I get one percent interest. I didn't agree to that. Nobody told me until after my money had already been sitting there for however long. So I don't think I want to impose that on to other people. So a pool would have fixed parameters
That could never change once it was initiated somehow. So what you're saying, that would be the stance that I would take on this. I think the only exception to this, might be like: perhaps we might make the exception that these can change during a protocol upgrade, because generally we take the stance that we can change the rules on protocol upgrades. And you know, I don't think anybody would be super offended if all the validators plus went through this huge review process to agree like this is gonna be better uniformly for everybody. So we should make it the de facto. But isn't Nico's point that when you make the second pull, if you wanted to change the fee in a second pull, it would affect the fee in the first pull? Are they coupled like in Siddharth's proposal? And I'll let him talk more about it. But he's offering like these three different fear. In his example he's offering these three different fee tiers and you can imagine being in the mid tier fee. You know
You could have the low tier one, the mid, two one, the high tier one, and then you know the validators vote like, okay, we're gonna move the mid tier one from point five to point six or something like that. So it would still be possible to be in a world where there are multiple pools and still have multiple fees, but have them globally controlled so that existing ones get changed anyway. Not saying that I support that, but I think that's possible. But, Siddharth, you can step in here if I'm not hitting this correctly. No, that was right and that, like, the nice thing here is that you and I don't know if this actually matters, but you control the number of possible pools, right? I don't know if that matters for, like liquid liquidity fragmentation, right, like if we allow, if we end up allowing like 10 or 15 constant product pools, like will that be an issue? Or do we assume that everyone will move to the most optimal pool? Optimal pool, like I I'm not sure what will end up happening there.
I tend to think that people would have probably eventually settled down onto the right thing, but I also don't think that's a particularly nice user experience. It's like decision paralysis when you get to the grocery store and you're like, wow, there's a 37 brands of corn flakes. Which one am I gonna buy? Yeah, why do you need that in your life? So it's. It does sound like if we were to make any of the parameters mutable, it would only be the fee, right, like if? Like we shouldn't change anything like the curve or anything like that for any of the. You know, if we add a new pool type? Like those should not be mutable, right, I don't think those should be mutable only from like I don't know their. Nikolas shared this very
Cool defect report that colton, long ago, had shared with me and I shared with nikola, nikon. He posted it onto sellerdev- which is about changing the curve parameters other than the fee. I say defect report, I guess I should say vulnerability, whatever you want to call it. And if you're interested more, you should review that because it's very scary. I almost feel like this shouldn't be a configurable parameter. And if we do want to introduce a different fee, we can might as well just introduce a new type of pool. Like I think that a new type of pool, like I think that doing like, even if you don't change it for existing pools, I'll still, you know, I'll put
Some money into a pool one day, get you know one specific fee and the next day, after the configuration, change. It's a safe type of pool, but now I'm getting like a different type of fee, so that there's like it's just not explicit enough. A couple of people have said: why don't we just introduce a new pool, or why don't we do this? Who is the we in this situation? Does that make sense? I think there are two different ways one could take this. One way to introduce new types of pools would be that it's a protocol change. You know, like, if we're gonna go from having only constant product pools to having constant product rules and I don't know something curve like or balancer with weights or whatever we'd have to. You know the Stellar protocol developers, you know
People who work on CAPs, whatever would have to make that happen. Another way to look at we- this is an idea that nikola had a long time ago about having this like, this notion of like, instead of letting people choose any fee they want or any whatever they want, there are some configurations that the validators have voted on are good configurations. When you're creating something, you're basically choosing from that menu of good configurations and so in that setting we could be like validators. You know they voted on saying that, like now, the fee can be both 0 3 and 0 05 you know. So, depending on the context, I think we could be either of those cool things. Are there more questions about parameters? I mean, I feel like there's still a little bit more thinking there that we can sort of do in conversation on the Stellar dev list. I don't want to move on, though if there's important things left to be said,
But I feel like we're sort of at a good, point to move on. Right, I agree like the next one is actually related and maybe more interesting actually you want to explain it. Yeah, multiple pull support. Yeah, so it's basically the two proposals are actually quite different there. Like CAP 38 actually allows one asset pair to have arbitrary variations of pools for that one pair, so the variation can be on the curve type. It can be on any, really any other parameter, like we just talked about fee. So you can imagine having two pools on the same, two constant product pools, let's say, on the same asset pair, but one is going
To be, you know, super low c and the other is like going to be a high fee and then you know, the market kind of gets inside whatever capital. E7 identifies pools using the pool type and then, related to the thing we are talking about earlier, the fee is global. So at this point the only way you can have multiple pools on a given asset pair is if they defer on type. Do we want to have more of the first kind or the second time, right like which one is maybe more interesting? We want to have, like those,
A few number of options right in a for a given type, or do we think that one type enough? I think there are some like fundamental problems with the notion of like one instance of a pool per wait, hold on, actually, let me make sure I understand. Do you mean one instance of a pool per pair? Yeah, of course all this is fair, right, yeah, so one in? I think there's some like fundamental denial of service flaws, with one instance of a pool per pair, which is the question of who gets to choose what that pool will be like. Is it going to be the hyphy one? The low fee one is going to be curve. You know, I think, basically, if there can be multiple types of pools, we probably have to say that all of them can exist for the same pool to avoid having some arbitrary- and by arbitrary you can
Always take that to be adversarial decision maker- like: oh, this is a super volatile asset pair where, like you know, constant product with a high fee would be the best. I'm going to put in, you know, a curve with a super low fee to make it so nobody can use this. Don't want that to happen, but here, like you have the, you know, using cap37 as, like the like maybe the as a talking point. Like the earlier we were talking about fees, do we think that we want to have more than one few? I mean, I think that we probably want to have more than one tea and not just force like people to pick, like, oh yeah, this is the right fit for you, because
I think that different, asset classes actually have different like risk profile and volatility profile and therefore you want to have a different fee. You know, like you basically want the like crypto to crypto assets to have a different, probably a different fee than the stable coin to stable coin. Type of fair right. So yeah, you can let them compete and, like you were saying, like you can't let a single person decide on which one is the first one. So then how do you let the market decide? I think that's kind of what I'm getting. So it would bring market dynamics to bear on these, given uncompeting pools.
I don't really like. For me, the reality is I don't really see what we're choosing between. Like the choices in my head are kind of like there is exactly one type of pool and we apply that uniformly across the board, or there's one you know. Maybe you say like okay, like you can have different curves, but all the ones with the same curve have the same fee, whatever, like whatever you kind of take that model at, you're kind of saying like I'm gonna try to fit all the pegs into a single shaped hole. If you take that approach. And if you don't take that approach, then you're basically saying, well, like I'm gonna let the market decide what's the non stupid thing? And I don't like forcing pegs into holes that don't that they don't fit in. So for me it seems kind of like a very kind of obvious choice. But I'm wondering if somebody sees the argument that goes in the other direction, like: is there somebody who's like no, like John, you're definitely wrong.
Well, I think the argument I held before on trying to force everybody into the same group is: you avoid, like, splitting the liquidity. But I'm not. That's not my opinion either, you know. So I can't really support it, but that I just wanted to call it out. That's actually one of the argument that people call out. Yeah, I mean, I guess for me it kind of depends a lot on what the set of options are like. You can imagine a world where, like we just imagined that it was possible to create a constant product market maker with a fee at every thousandth of a percent. There's no difference between. I mean they're not literally identical, but there's no material difference between a fiat point three percent or point three zero one percent or point two nine percent.
They're kind of like exactly the same. And I think in that world you probably do have liquidity fragmentation between people doing effectively the exact same thing differently, whereas, you know, in a world where you're like, okay, like you have two fees on your constant product- one is like 0 05 and one is one percent- for totally different asset classes, I think there's going to be like a very obvious place that people are going to want to put their money in those kinds of cases and there won't be a lot of blurriness. I'm not 100 sure, but I think the amount of liquidity fragmentation depends on how distinct the options are. But even in that case, if market dynamics work, wouldn't people be drawn to the fool with the lower feet? Right if they were the same, but one even had a tiny bit lower fee, and then the two pools would be competing and they would actually that would push fees lower. Isn't that what you would expect? Not necessarily. Like, for example,
If the impermanent, like if prices are moving a lot and so there's a lot of impermanent loss, then people might make more money from the higher fee, even if people traded less as a consequence. And the other factor is, if everybody's in the high fee pool, then and like, let's say that, like, let's suppose a world where there's 99- sorry, 100- equivalent market makers, 99 of them are in the big pool, which has the high fees, and the one other guy is in the small city pool, in like the CAP 38 proposal for like, maybe some small trades would execute against the small pool, the small fee pool, but all the big trades would execute against the big fee pool because there'd be less slippage there, and so maybe that person would end up making less money by being in the low fee pool and then they decide to join the high fuel pool anyway, right? So I think it's not obvious. There's a bunch of different ways these kinds of things could shape out.
So I mean, maybe the answer to this is no, but I'm just wondering if there's any. If it's, it just seems better to have only one pool, you know, other than the fact that you would have to agree on the parameters. But I'm wondering if there's any way to kind of select the pool objectively, like basically say that you know, for any given pool, you, if there's multiple pools for an asset pair, you just pick the one that has the highest product or highest product plus reserve where people can pledge some reserve or something, so you can let people sort of bid on what they have, because what you kind of want, is like you want, like you know, in the kind of Stellar fashion of like it's just to everyone's advantage to do what everybody else is doing, which is kind of like the whole philosophy of Stellar. On some level, you kind of would like market forces to decide this, and so to the extent that then somebody, a lot of people, decide that you want to do something else, then it should like make sense to move over to that. That's something else. But I mean that's John briefly mentioned this. My new idea
Earlier, so that's kind of what I proposed earlier is basically try to kind of find a good middle ground, right, like you don't want to have like a single pool. You know where you're forcing to this one rate, you know across all assets. You know that's. I think that's kind of trying to. That's too prescriptive on the other hand, if you allow people to set any price, you know any fee and all that you end up with like this huge, like you can't pick a pool, basically like there are an infinite number of pools. So the menu idea is to have validators actually describe the combinations that you are, that you can use on the network, and the combinations would be a combination, for example, like constant product, you can have like low, medium, high, c or something like that, and then when you want to deposit assets in a
Pool, you pick which of which item on the menu you want, right, you can say, okay, this is like a stable coin one, so I'm going to pick this scoff paying with this parameter, right, okay? So here's- I think you know this is probably not workable, but just to like, get some design point out there. Suppose that you know, people can sponsor these liquidity pools, using lumens, and basically you can propose any value, any parameter you want. However, in order to introduce a new liquidity pool when there's already one, for that asset pair, two things have to happen: one, you have to pledge more lumens than the previous reserve as pledged, and two, you have to have it like as at least as much liquidity in terms or the product has to be at least as great in terms of the assets you put in there. So this would allow people to change when everybody wanted to change,
But it would sort of make it a little. bit sticky. What a? I get what you're getting at here, but like a kind of just practical implementation type question, before we talk about this on the merits, it's just like what about the case when you have pools that were like the product is a different number, the invariant is a different number. You know the curve, invariant is some really complicated thing. That's really gross to write down, and so they're obviously comparable. There would be some requirement that for any pool that we introduce, but there needs to be a depth metric which is a number and where somehow we believe that, in general, deeper markets are better than shallower.
How would you, I guess, like what would at like a high level, what would an implementation of all of this kind of look like in an abstract sense, but like we need some new kinds of entries and stuff like what is it like? How do you say that you're voting for one of these pools? Like what does it mean for, like, if you're voting for a pool but the pool doesn't actually work yet, what is, what are? How do all these things kind of work at a high level? Yeah, I guess you have some number of, let's say, you have some number of candidate pools and in order, maybe, in order to create a candidate pool, you have to pledge sort of twice the base reserve that's pledged for the previous one or something. So we can't get like an infinite number of these. And then for the candidate pools, there's some amount of capital that's pledged, and so if one of the candidate pools suddenly gets more or more depth, right, there's some amount of capitalist pledge, and if at
Some point one of the candidate pools ends up with more depth than the existing pool, then people would switch over. So the basic assumption here is that, like sort of 90 of the people participating in a liquidity pool would say, hey, like actually we want to go to a lower fee or something right. And so once everybody wants to do that, they can make it happen. But, like you know, a random person who's just trying to disrupt the existing market would have to, like amass a lot of capital and essentially end up making a more liquid market in order to- disrupt the existing market. It's a kind of interesting idea. I'd have to think about that a bit. I like definitely have some concerns along the same line, as somebody mentioned now, I think eric mentioned- about, like this, like ephemeral trust line type of thing. You can imagine somebody putting a lot of putting their money where their mouth is in like a huge amount, and then you know
Five ledgers later being like I just did, that to screw you guys all up and then just pulling their money back. On the other hand, if what they did is provided people like really low fee transactions for five ledgers, like is it so bad? Like they could have done the same thing by placing offers on the orderbook, right, it's a fair point. So we only have five minutes left and I think that's fine because I think a lot of these questions can we can continue to sort of talk about them or to think about some of the suggestions that were raised and deal with them. On the Stellar debt mailing list, there were two other topics that we didn't really get into. One was compliance and one was rounding. Do we want to take a second to talk about either of those right now? Would that be useful or is it too much to take on either one of those topics in the last four minutes? It seems hard and for me, I mean, I'm like I'm very interested in talking about these, but in detail,
It just seems like it'll be unsatisfying to get into them now. Okay, that makes sense to me, I mean. I think then the question is: what are the next steps after this meeting? Do we- I feel like it is, to continue the discussion on Stellar death? But are there other follow up actions that need to happen in order to make that possible? I'm still trying to understand whether we've narrowed down the scope of which pools can exist and which ones can't like for a given asset pair. Have we agreed we can only have one pool? Or could we have multiple pools with different kinds of curve for that asset pair, for example? Like, I would love to write that down. Well, I think what we were talking about was that we, I think they, we agreed that there would be more than one pool per asset there.
What we are talking about last was more about the governance that goes with introducing a new pool. Like you can do it in many ways. The good news is that we don't necessarily have to solve that. I think in this version because right now we're introducing only one constant product and I'm not sure we want to introduce in the first version the support for more than one rate. Right, like we can basically for now, like I think that's what capital e8 says, or even capital e7. That is, there's only one rate and I'm it's probably fine for the very first version, but it's interesting to think about how to change that in the future. Right, if you'd be willing, David, I'd be like very interested to see like a high level write up of what you were describing so I can
Of what you were describing so I can think about that more deeply yeah maybe I can just draft something by email or something yeah that'd be fine it doesn't have to be super formal sure and I noticed for the future but there was the idea of a menu right that was sort of validator determined there was this idea of you can replace by better with some depth metric were there any other contenders for ways to do this well that was the question in the first thing right that was don't even allow to have more than one right yeah which is a third option sure okay there's also the free for all option anarchy I love the anarchy every time I'm listening to this I'm like this is we're talking about anarchy or we're talking about like soviet style communism or we're talking about just like free market capitalism I feel like there's ideologies behind all these choices you know John's like there should only be one kind of corn flake
Right I can go for like three kinds of corn flakes just to be fair cool yeah you want the you know you're on the special occasion it's your birthday conflict right man I hope you have some like something like flat pink blueberry pancakes on your birthday not cornflakes I don't even know okay that's time thanks everybody and thanks everyone who's watching at home again this discussion will continue on the Stellar dev google group which you can find a link to in the actual event description there's already a lot that's happened there and we will continue to have these discussions in these meetings to start to hammer out more of these proposals but again two proposals a lot of discussion many things that we covered today but many more things to cover look there to see what's happening this conversation will happen both sort of asynchronously there and synchronously here in the future
And we really appreciate everyone for being here thanks everyone